Technical Specifications
MERLIN – SEA LEVEL
Throat Area
0.042 m2
Nozzle Area
0.90 m2
Engine Type
Liquid, gas generator
Model
Merlin-1D++
Propellant
LOX / RP-1
Propellant Mix
2.36
Propellant Feed System
Turbopump
Thrust (Sea Level)
854 kN / 190,000 lbf
Specific Impulse
283 sec
Chamber Pressure
10.8 MPa
Throttle Capability
Yes (100% to 57%)
Restart Capability
Yes
Nozzles
Gimbaled, 16:1 expansion
MERLIN – VACUUM
Throat Area
0.042 m2
Nozzle Area
4.90 m2
Engine Type
Liquid, gas generator
Model
Merlin-1DV+
Propellant
LOX / RP-1
Propellant Mix
2.38
Propellant Feed System
Turbopump
Thrust (vacuum)
981 kN / 220,500 lbf
Specific Impulse (vacuum)
348 sec
Throttle Capability
Yes (100% to 64%)
Restart Capability
Yes
Nozzles
Gimbaled, 165:1 expansión

The Merlin rocket engines are specifically developed for recovery and reuse features of the Falcon series of launch vehicles. These engines are gimbaled and have throttle and restart capability for high degrees of control. Two of the nine Merlin engines in the first stage of the Falcon 9 can malfunction without affecting the launch. Merlin engines utilize cooled rocket-grade kerosene (RP-1) and chilled liquid oxygen as rocket propellants in a gas-generator power cycle. A Turbopump feed system feeds the propellant, heated helium pressurizes the fuel tank. and dual redundant triethylaluminum-triethylborane (TEA-TEB) pyrophoric igniters for restart reliability.

The current active models are Merlin 1D (M1D) for sea-level and Merlin 1D Vac (MVac) for vacuum. These engines have a thrust of 854 kilonewtons at sea level and 981 kilonewtons in a vacuum, respectively. It has the highest thrust-to-weight ratio of approximately 200:1. The Merlin 1D features increased reliability by increasing fatigue life and improving chamber and nozzle thermal margins. It is also easier to manufacture by decreasing the parts count and labor hours.  

Problem / Solution
Space is an expensive business. NASA’s space shuttles and Russia’s Soyuz rockets cost an average of $1.6 billion and $53-$225 million for every launch, respectively. However, using reusable booster rockets significantly reduces the expenses for spaceflight. 

Since conventional engine designs are not suited for reusable launch vehicles, the Merlin rocket engines are designed and developed specifically to be used in the Falcon series of launch vehicles. The Merlin engines feature retrograde thrust, gimbaled nozzles to adjust the thrust angle, advanced heat shield, high thrust-to-weight ratio, minimized failure nodes, etc. These factors enable the Merlin to be the most suitable engine for the Falcon launch vehicles. 

Design
Engine control

Each Merlin engine is assigned one processing unit, which employs three computers constantly checking on the others to instantiate a fault-tolerant design called a triple-redundant system.


Gas generator

Merlin engines utilize cooled rocket-grade kerosene (RP-1) and chilled liquid oxygen (LOX) as rocket propellants in an open-cycle or gas-generator power cycle instead of a staged combustion cycle. A gas-generator cycle burns some of the fuels to generate exhaust gasses that power the pumps, then expelled to the atmosphere or vacuum.


Turbopump

The engine’s propellants are supplied by a single-shaft, dual-impeller turbopump with a pintle-type injector, which provides inherent combustion stability. The Merlin LOX/RP-1 turbopump spins at 36,000 RPM, and produces 10,000 horsepower or 7,500 kW. The turbopump design supplies the hydraulic actuators with high-pressure fluid, which is recycled back into the low-pressure inlet. Thus, a separate hydraulic drive system is not needed.


Nozzle

The Sea Level Merlin engines used in the second stage have a smaller exhaust section and 16:1 expansion nozzle primarily for ascent from Earth.  The Vacuum Merlin engine used in the second stage has a bigger exhaust section and a larger expansion nozzle of 165:1 to maximize efficiency in the vacuum.  The combustion chamber is cooled by regenerative cooling, while the expansion nozzle is by radiative cooling. The nozzle and thrust chamber are lined with a milled copper alloy to provide large heat flux margins.


we’re going to line up engines by their fuel types and cycles. So let’s compare SpaceX’s open cycle Merlin engine that powers their Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets, NPO Energomesh’s oxygen-rich closed cycle RD-180 that we see power the Atlas V rocket and Rocketdyne’s open cycle F-1 engine that powered the Saturn V which all run on RP-1. Then we have SpaceX’s full flow staged combustion cycle Raptor engine that will power their Starship and Super Heavy booster and Blue Origin’s closed cycle oxygen rich methane powered BE-4 engine that will power their New Glenn rocket and ULA’s upcoming Vulcan rocket, and Aerojet Rocketdyne’s closed cycle fuel rich RS-25 engine that powered the space shuttle and will power the upcoming SLS rocket which runs on Hydrogen.

A few quick notes here. The Raptor and BE-4 as of the making of this article are still in development, so the numbers we have are either in their current state of progress like the Raptor which is constantly improving and in the case of the BE-4, those are the target goals for the engine which Blue Origin has yet to hit. So just keep these numbers in mind that they’re subject to change.

Another fun note… look at the RD-180… now don’t be confused, this is a single engine, it just has two combustion chambers! There’s only a single turbo pump that splits its power to two combustion chambers. The Soviet Union was able to solve the crazy hot oxygen rich closed cycle problem, but they were unable to solve combustion instability of large engines, so instead of one large combustion chamber, they made multiple small ones!

So first up, let’s take a look at their total thrust output at sea level since all these engines run at sea level, that’s a fair place to compare them. Let’s go from the least amount of thrust to the most, for fun 😉  The Merlin produces .84 MNs of thrust, the RS-25 produces 1.86 MNs, the Raptor currently is at 2 MNs, the BE-4 is hoping to hit 2.4 MNs, the RD-180 // 3.83 MNs ad the F-1 is still the king out of these at  6.77 MNs.

space rocket merchandise spacex shirts shirt hats mug moon lamp light 3d printed grid fin not a coasters patch spaceflight merch swag shop webstore

The RD-170 actually produced more thrust than the F-1, but since it barely ever flew, I figured it wasn’t as relevant in this line up, figured it’s better to go with engines that have actually been used, a lot!

Thrust is great, but what’s maybe just as important when designing a rocket is the thrust to weight ratio… or how heavy the engine is compared to how much thrust it produces. A higher thrust to weight engine ultimately means less dead weight the rocket needs to lug around.

Let’s start from lowest to highest here. The lowest is actually the Space Shuttle’s RS-25 at 73:1, then there’s the RD-180 which is 78:1, then we have the BE-4 at around 80:1 but keep in mind, we don’t actually have a really good number on this, so there might be some wiggle room there, then the F-1 is 94:1, then we have the Raptor at 107:1 (for now), and lastly the Merlin is actually the leader here with an astonishing 198:1 thrust to weight ratio…. Yeah… that thing is a power house.

Thrust is great and all, but who cares how powerful an engine is if it’s terribly inefficient? So next up let’s check out their specific impulses, which is measured in seconds. For this we’ll show both the sea level specific impulse as well as the specific impulse in a vacuum. So starting with the least efficient engine which is the F-1 engine at 263 to 304 seconds, then the Merlin engine at 282 to 311 seconds, then we get the RD-180 at 311 to 338 seconds and somewhere in that same ballpark is the BE-4 which is AROUND 310 to 340 seconds, next up is the Raptor engine which is 330 to around 350 seconds, and lastly the king here by far is the RS-25 which is 366 to 452 seconds! WOAH.

Now one of the factors that affect both thrust and specific impulse is chamber pressure. Generally, the higher the chamber pressure, the more thrust and potentially more efficiency the engine can gain. Higher chamber pressures let an engine be smaller for a given thrust level, also improving their thrust to weight ratio. The baby here is actually the F-1 which only had 70 bar in its chamber pressure. Now I do need to pause for a second and remind you 70 bar is 70 TIMES the atmospheric pressure… or the same amount of pressure you’d experience at 700 meters underwater… yikes… ok, so even the lowest chamber pressure is still mind boggling high.

So next up is the Merlin engine at 97 bar, then the BE-4 will be around 135 ish, then the RS-25 which is 206 bar, then the RD-180 which has been considered the king of operational engines at 257 bar, that is until the Raptor is now online which is the new king of chamber pressure at a whopping 270 bars currently and they hope to get it up to 300 bar!!! 300 bar is like being 3 km deep in the ocean. I can’t even fathom.

So for starters, since the RD-180 and the F-1 aren’t reusable, their price stays the same, but for the rest of the engines, if we take into account how many flights they have/will have, now we start to see the RS-25’s reusability pay off and close the gap, bringing it’s potential cost down to just $1,414 : kN, but here’s where things get crazy. Blue Origin’s BE-4 has potential to be truly game changing at around $133 : kN over 25 flights, which could make it about as cheap to operate than the Merlin at $117 per kN per flight. But if the Raptor engine truly lives up to its hype, it could bring that number all the way down to $20 per kN per flight. Now that is absolutely game changing.

Sure, money and reusability is a 21st century focus for spaceflight, but whatever happened to good old proven reliability? For this, let’s first look at how many operational flights each engine has had. At the moment of writing this, the Raptor and BE-4 haven’t seen any operational flights, although the Raptor is starting to leave the test stand and being used on test vehicles like the StarHopper. But for now neither engine has a real flight record. Then we have the F-1 engine which was used on 17 flights, next up the Merlin engine which is at 71 flights and catching up quickly to the RD-180 which is at 79 flights, but the king out of these engines is the RS-25 which saw 135 flights.

Now lastly, how about reliability in service. Between the number of flights and this number, we can get a pretty good sense of how truly reliable an engine is. This number is really hard to just pin down since some engines may have shut down early but the mission was still successful on a few of these examples… so take these with a little grain of salt again. Again, the BE-4 and Raptor haven’t flown yet, so those numbers are unavailable, then we have the Space Shuttle main engine which is over 99.5% reliable, but that gets hard to define when an engine doesn’t fully shut down…

and then we have the Merlin at 99.9% reliable… it helps when you have 10 engines on each flight of the vehicle, and with only one engine ever failing in flight early on in its career, and despite that, the mission was still a success… so it’s a very reliable engine! Now to end this, technically the RD-180 and the F-1 are 100% reliable, but with the F-1 never having any shut down at all in flight, it gets the bold here… and depending on how you define success and reliability, technically, the RD-180 is only kind of 100% reliable, because it got really really lucky once.

One time it shut down 6 seconds early, on an Atlas V mission in 2016, due to a faulty valve, but the mission went on to be a success because of some pure luck with the centaur upperstage having enough spare Delta V to carry out the mission! Had that valve failed even a second earlier and that mission would have failed.

Man… seeing all of these numbers and considerations it makes you realize just how many variables go into designing a rocket. It’s so crazy to think about how if you tweak one little variable how many things that can affect. Change any one thing and it can have a massive ripple effect in the design and implementation of the vehicle as a whole.

So let’s go back over all of this now that we know the cycles, the fuels and the aspirations of SpaceX to see if we can figure out why the Raptor engines exists and figure out if it’s worth all the effort.

Let’s look at SpaceX’s ultimate plan. Make a rapidly and fully reusable vehicle capable of sending humans to the Moon and Mars as inexpensively and routinely as possible. Not your everyday design goal for a rocket huh? In order to be rapidly and fully reusable, the engine needs to run clean and require low maintenance with simple turbopump seals and low preburner temperatures. Hmm, a Methane fueled full flow staged combustion cycle engine sounds like a good fit….

For reliability, redundancy and scale of manufacturing considerations, it makes sense to employ a lot of engines. In order to scale an engine down but maintain a high output, chamber pressure needs to be high… Hmm sounds like a methane fueled full flow staged combustion cycle engine sounds like a good fit…

For interplanetary trips, methane makes the most sense because it’s boiling point makes it usable on long duration trips to say Mars, which guess what, you can produce Methane on Mars… so for interplanetary trips, a methane fueled full flow staged combustion cycle engine sounds like a good fit…

Methane is fairly dense, meaning the tank size remains reasonable. Which again is good for interplanetary trips, not needing to lug around dead weight…  making a methane fueled full flow staged combustion cycle engine sounds like a good fit…

So… let’s bring it alllll back around now, is the Raptor engine really the king of rocket engines? Well, rocket science, like all things is a complex series of compromises. Is it the most efficient engine, no. Is it the most powerful engine, no. Is it the cheapest engine, probably not. Is it the most reusable engine, maybe.  But does it do everything really well? YES. It truly is a goldilocks engine, doing everything it needs to do very very well. It is the perfect fit for your interplanetary spaceship.

The reason it is so complicated is that all of the exhaust gas that would normally be dumped overboard after spinning the turbine is instead routed into the main combustion chamber and used for thrust. Not only that, but there are two of those little rocket engines – each with their own turbines and pumps. The exhausts from which are pumped into the main combustion chamber. One of those is fuel-rich and the other is oxygen-rich.

Despite extremely hot gaseous oxygen wanting to turn every bit of the engine into soup, having the fuel and the oxygen arrive in the combustion chamber as a hot gas adds a huge boost in efficiency.

One little note here, if an engine is a closed cycle, we will call the gas generator a preburner since it’s just preburning the fuel or oxidizer, which is then routed straight into the combustion chamber.

Super-chilled Propellant
One thing unique to SpaceX is in the constant pursuit of performance, they began utilizing super-chilled propellants on Falcon 9 in 2015. With the introduction of their first “full thrust” iteration, they started chilling the RP-1 and LOX more than any other operational rocket.

SpaceX chills their RP-1 from almost ambient down by about 30 °C, which typically gets it below 0 °C. But that’s nothing compared to the liquid oxygen, which is chilled all the way down to -207 °C – that’s only 12 degrees away from freezing solid!

Although they haven’t yet gotten too far into super chilling propellants for Raptor, it is in the works. But by default liquid methane is very close in temperature to liquid oxygen since it’s boiling point is -161.5 °C and it becomes a solid at -182 °C.

next: their sizes. Starship is massive. Like, really really big. Don’t get me wrong, Falcon 9 is actually quite a decent sized rocket and it’s really hard to appreciate how big it actually is until you’re standing underneath it. But at 9 m wide compared to the Falcon 9’s 3.7 m diameter, the Falcon 9 is narrow enough to be transported cross country by road, but Starship – not so much. Although, it does get transported by road, it only does a little tiny bit on a completely closed off highway in Boca Chica, Texas.

Size
The Falcon 9 stands 70 m tall with its first stage at 45 m tall while the second stage and the nose cone, or fairing as we call it, comprise the other 25 m. Despite being pretty tall, the entire Falcon 9 will be able to fit inside just the SuperHeavy booster.

The SuperHeavy booster will stand over 72 m tall, likely closer to 75 m tall. Then put the Starship upperstage on top of the Super Heavy Booster and the entire stack will stand 122 m tall – that’s over 10 m taller than the monster Saturn 

